History of python :
Python was developed by Guido Van Rossum in 1991 on 20th feb while working on national research at netherland in 1989

it was designed with help of C language and abc

platform independent
easy
portable

Introduction to python

python is a general purpose high level programming language.
Python was developyed by Guido Van Rossam in 1989 while working at Nation Research Insititute at Netherlands.
But officially Python was made available to public in 1991. The official Date of Birth for Python is : Feb 20th 1991
Python is recommended as first programming language for beginners.
The name Python was selected from the TV Show "The complete Monty Python's Circus", which was broadcasted in BBC from 1969 to 1974.
Guido developed Python language by taking almost all programming features from different languages:
1.) Functional Programming features from C 
2.) Object Oriented Programming Features from C++
3.) Scripting Language features from Perl and Shell Script
4.) 4. Modular Programming features from Modula-3

Most of syntax in Python Derived from C and ABC languages 

Where we can use Python

1.) For developing Desktop Applications
2.) For developing web Applications
3.) For developing database Applications
4.) For Network Programming
5.) For developing games
6.) For Data Analysis Applications
7.) For Machine learning
8.) For developing artificial Intelligence Applications
9.) For IOT 

Features of Python
1.) Simple and easy to learn
2.) Freeware and Open Source 
3.) High Level Programming language
4.) Platform Independent 
5.) Portability 
6.) Dynamically Typed
7.) Both Procedure Oriented and Object Oriented 
8.) Interpreted
9.) Extensive Library

Limitations of Python:
1.) It is not used for mobile Applications
2.) It is interpreted, so it is not as performant as C or C++ or any compiled language 

Reserve words
In Python some words are reserved to represent some meaning or functionality
Such type of words are called Reserved words.
There are 33 reserved words available in Python

True,False,None

and, or, not, is
if,elif,else
while, for, break, continue, return, in, yield
try,except, finally,raise,assert
import,from,as,class,def,pass,global,nonlocal,lambda,del,with

Note: 1.All Reserved words in Python contain only alphabet symbols.
2. Except the following 3 reserved words, all contain only lower case alphabet symbols
True




List , Tuple , set , dictionry 

four built in data structures in python 
list Tuple set dictionry 
each having qualities  and usage diffrent from the three


LIST is a collection of items that is written with square brackets . It is mutable . ordered and allowed duplicates members 

Tuple : - It  is a collection of objects that is written with first brackets . It is immutable 

Set :- It is the collection of elements that is written with curly brackets . It is unindexed and unordered 

lecture 3 : 10 september 2024 


Operators 
Additions 
multiplication 
division 
Remainder 
Binaray left shift 
and 
less than 
less than or equal to 
check equality 
substraction 
exponentiation 
integer division 
Binaray right shift 
or 
greater than '
greater equal to 


                     PRECEDENCE OF Operators 
Parenthesized expressiom 
exponentiation
positive , negative , bitwise not 
multiplication , , float , division , int division , Remainder
Additions , substraction
bitwise left , right shift 
bitwise and 
bitwise or 
membership and equality test 
not , < , <= ,> ,>= , != , == 
boolean (logical) not 
boolean and 
boolean or 
conditional expressiom          

                      Comments 
Single line comments begins with a hash(#) symbol and is useful in mentaining that the whole line should be consider asa a comment until the end of the line 

A multi line comment is useful when we need to comment on many lines . In python triple and double qoutes are used in multi lining comment 








Lecture 4 : 11th september 2024 







TYPE CASTING 

We can convert one type value to the another type value .This conversion is called Typecasting or type conversion 
The following are the various in built fuctions for type casting 

1) int()
2) float()
3) complex()
4) bool()
5) str()



1) Int() :- int fuctions is used to convert the any data type to int data type 

example : - 
>>> int(1234)
1234
>>> int(10+4)
typeerror:can't convert complex to int 
>>> int("10.5")
invalid literal for int() with base 10 : 

note : we can not convert any type value to float type except complex type . 

2) complex(): 
we can use complex() function to convert other types to complex 

Form-1 :- complex(x)
we can use this function to convert x into complex number with real part x and imaginary part 0 

example : complex(10)==>10+0j
complex(10.5)==> 10.5+0j 
complex("ten")===> this give the valurError     beacuse we the string argo in the complex function 


Form-2 :- complex(x,y)
we can use this method to convert x and y into the complex number here x is the real part and y is the imaginary part 
example:- 
complex(14,6)===> 14+6j


3) bool():
we can use this function to convert other type value to bool type 


if the int or float type is in the range of 0 then it will return the value false and the number come in the range of 1 then the ans is true 

example: 
bool(0)==> false 
bool(1)==>true 

4) str():
  we can use this method to convert other type value to str type 
ex :- 
    >>>str(10)
    '10' 
    >>>str(10.5)
    '10.5'


Fundamental data type v/s immutability: 

All the data type are immutable that is one  we create an object , we cannot perform any changes in that object . If we are trying to change then with those changes a new object will be created . This non changeable behaviour is caled immutability 